# Computer networks fundamentals



**Introduction**

a computer network is a set of nodes connected by communication links to perform the delivery of a set of information.

**Nodes**: a node can be a computer, printer or any other devices capable of sending or receiving data generated by other nodes in the network.

*example:* computer, server, printer, cctv, switches, bridges, routers etc.

**Communication links**: a communication link can be wired or wireless links.

- links carries the information.

-------------fig---------

- communication links can be wired or wireless link.
- links carries the information.

*examples*: links(medium)

Wired-cable

wireless- Air, Bluetooth etc.

- computer network is used for resources sharing,

  ---fig-----

**Computer networks**

------fig-------

| End devices | Intermediate devices |
| :---------: | :------------------: |
|   printer   |        Router        |
|     pc      |        cloud         |
|   server    |   wireless router    |
|   tablet    |      cell tower      |
| smartphone  |                      |

**Basics characteristics of a computer networks**

- Fault tolerance
- scalability
- quality of services(qos)
- security

**Fault tolerance**

- ability's to continue working desire failures
- ensure no loss of services

---fig--------------

**scalability**

- ability to grow based on the nodes
- have good performances after growth.
- if 10 computers re added to networks then again 10 computers can be added according to need and no decrement in performances.
- scalable networks- the internet
- scalability handles the loss as well as the priority of data.

**Quality of services**

- ability to
- set priorities
- manage data trafic to reduce data loss,delay etc.

----fig-----

**Security**

- ability to prevent

- unauthorized data

- misuse

- forgery

- ability to provide

  - confidentiality
  - integrity
  - availability

  -------fig------

  **Data communication**

  data communication are the exchange of data between two nodes via some form of link(transmission medium) such as cable.

  ------fig-------------

  **Data flow**

  - it means nodes are going to exchange the data.

  - data is going to flow from one node to another node

  - there are 3 forms of data flows.

    1. Simplex
    2. Half duplex
    3. Full duplex

    

    **Simplex**

    - in simplex data flows, communication is always unidirectional.

    - one devices can transmit and other devices will receive.

      *example*s: keyboard, traditional monitors etc.

      -------fig------------

    **Half duplex**

    - in half duplex, communication is in both directions but not at simultaneously.

    - if one device is sending, the other devices can only receive & vice versa.

      *examples*: walkies-talkies

    **Full duplex**

    - communication is in both directions

    

  
